welcome to topcast and to what is the
final installment of knowledge and
ignorance part six of my readings from
and Reflections upon on the sources of
knowledge and of ignorance a lecture by
Carl popper it is a lecture in 17 parts
and we are now at part 13. as we get
towards Papa's conclusion he begins to
Rapid Fire summarize what has gone
before and this culminates in a succinct
answer to the questions where does
knowledge come from where does ignorance
come from
and hopefully I remember in saying in
promoting this particular episode that
if you're going to listen to none of the
other episodes one through five of this
series listen to part six because it
contains so much of Papa's actual
position as you'll say at the beginning
of part 13 which is where we're up to
today and we're going to get to the end
of part 17. what he says at the
beginning is that he's taken a
historical view but he's going to leave
that behind and he's going to show you
the progress that he's making he's
already dealt with the mistakes that
people have made the errors of the past
and showing that he can move forward he
can take things further when it comes to
what this stuff called knowledge is and
why it is that if we're able to come to
some understanding of the world our
understanding is still incomplete hence
we have ignorance he's given some
account already of why it is the
empiricists thought the way they did and
the rationalists thought as they did so
I'm about ready to die live in but
before I do a little piece of rare
housekeeping if you've been watching
this series on YouTube you might notice
a little error in part five the last
podcast I made on this particular
lecture and that error was that if you
get all the way through it I think few
people do in the final minute the audio
is missing so if that's a problem for
you just go to the podcast version of
this on Apple podcast or podbean or
Spotify or wherever you happen to get
your podcast and the full thing is there
so you can get that last 50 second
minute I think of my podcast there
rather than me having to upload a whole
new one as I say we're at part 14. this
really is a tour de force from pop-up
kind of sums up his entire epistemology
here he traverses science as always
history choir history you know the
subject of History itself as well as the
history of philosophy the history of
ideas and his political philosophy he
summarizes as well it gets him tension
it's all tied up and summarized here
with breathtaking Clarity this is really
me celebrating proper I am going to
comment as we go through but it's more
like have you heard of those viewing
parties that people people get together
online and they watch the same movie or
the same TV show this is kind of what
this is okay I'm not going to be adding
my own insights here so much as reading
through popper and just sort of clapping
along at just how wonderful he is in
expressing these ideas for the first
time in a way which I still find
wonderfully clear today so here we are
at part 13 and let me begin Papa right
here quote I will now leave all these
largely historical Reflections aside and
turn to the problems themselves and to
their solution this part of my lecture
might be described as an attack on
empiricism as formulated for example in
the following classical statement of
Humes and here popper quotes Hume and
Hume says quote if I ask you why you
believe any particular matter of fact
you must tell me some reason and this
reason will be some other fact connected
with it but as you cannot proceed after
this manner in infinitum you must at
last terminate in some fact which is
present to your memory or senses or must
allow that your belief is entirely
without Foundation end quote from the
inquiry concerning human understanding
Section 5 part one then Papa goes on to
say quote
problem of the validity of empiricism
may be roughly put as follows is
observation the ultimate source of our
knowledge of Nature and if not what are
the sources of knowledge these questions
remain whatever I may have said about
bacon and even if I should have managed
to make those parts of this philosophy
on which I have commented somewhat
unattractive for baconians and for other
empiricists the problem of the source of
our knowledge has recently been restated
as follows if we make an assertion we
must justify it but this means that we
must be able to answer the following
questions
how do you know what are the sources of
your assertion this the empiricist holds
amounts in its turn to the question What
observations or memories of observations
underlie your assertion I find this
string of questions quite unsatisfactory
first of all most of our assertions are
not based on observations but upon all
kinds of other sources
I read it in the times or perhaps I read
it in the Encyclopedia Britannica is a
more likely and more definite answer to
the question how do you know then I have
observed it or I know it from an
observation I made last year end quote
we wonder what Papa would say today I
mean his point has only been made more
profound by the existence of the
so-called Information Age the existence
of the internet so I read it in the
times or I read it in the Encyclopedia
Britannica has of course been replaced
with I read it on Wikipedia I read it
via Google maybe chat GPT told me
whatever the case the empiricist is
going to say ah but those terminate
somewhere somewhere in observations
ultimately those sources relied on other
sources and perhaps other sources that
finally do end at some point but do they
now Wittgenstein also said we get to a
point where our Spade is turned at some
point we get to a fact of the matter and
we can't ask any further questions so he
too endorsed the it terminates somewhere
idea as well but if you embrace it's a
woven web of guesses there's no
termination there may be a beginning a
Genesis of sorts with the knowledge but
the Genesis itself can be a problem we
can ask of it why it's not a termination
it could itself be a beginning point for
more questions and more knowledge more
exploration more conjecturing of
knowledge and testing the knowledge as
papa will come to soon as poppy himself
goes on to say quote but the empiricist
will reply how do you think think that
the times or the Encyclopedia Britannica
got their information surely if you only
Carryout on your inquiry long enough you
will end up with reports of the
observations of eyewitnesses sometimes
called protocol sentences or by yourself
basic statements admittedly the
empiricist will continue books are
largely made from other books admittedly
a historian for example will work from
documents But ultimately in the last
analysis these other books or documents
must have been based upon observations
otherwise they would have to be
described as poetry or invention or lies
but not as testimony it is in this sense
that we empiricists assert that
observation must be the ultimate source
of our knowledge here we have the
empiricists case as it is still put by
some of my positivist friends end quote
he says positivist there what does he
mean what is Papa talking about with
positivism the positivists were those
who were against popper in thinking that
knowledge was conjectural but and rather
that knowledge in fact was only about
those statements those statements were
only validly called knowledge or
deserving of the title of knowledge
insofar as they could be verified as
true by science or proven by the methods
of mathematics as being true these were
the only things that had genuine meaning
okay and so this comes out obviously
from the wittgenstein's philosophy Papa
goes on to say quote
I shall try to show that this case is as
little valid as Bacons that the answer
to the question of the sources of
knowledge goes against the empiricist
and finally that this whole question of
ultimate sources sources to which one
may appeal as one might to a higher
court or a higher authority must be
rejected as based upon a mistake first I
want to show that if you actually went
on questioning the times and its
correspondence about the sources of
their knowledge you would in fact never
arrive at all those observations by
eyewitnesses in the existence of which
the empiricist believes you would find
rather that with every step you take the
need for further steps increases in
snowball-like fashion take as an example
the sort of assertion for which
reasonable people might simply accept as
the sufficient answer I read it in the
times let us say the assertion the Prime
Minister has decided to return to London
several days ahead of schedule now
assume for a moment somebody doubts this
insertion or feels the need to
investigate its truth what shall he do
if he has a friend in the prime
minister's office the simplest and most
direct way would be to ring him up and
if this friend corroborates the message
then that is that in other words the
investigator will if possible try to
check or to examine the asserted fact
itself rather than trace the source of
the information but according to the
empiricist theory the assertion I have
read in the times is merely a first step
in a justification procedure consisting
in tracing the ultimate source what is
the next step just pausing the Mi
reflection so notice here Papa setting
up the great contradiction or the way in
which these two views of knowledge are
at loggerheads on the one hand the
empiricists are saying well you've got
to find the ultimate source of the
knowledge to determine whether or not
it's valid or to say that it's knowledge
in some way to say whether or not it
counts as having solved your problem we
might say in Papa's view but pop is just
saying all you reasonably do when
presented with an assertion is to check
it check it against something else
that's reasonable in the world maybe
there's a person in the prime minister's
office in this case who can check for
you you can check with them you know is
this true is the prime minister actually
coming back to Britain three days ahead
of schedule something like that but if
someone comes to you you know random you
know you're having a random conversation
with a friend and you're saying isn't it
unusual the prime minister is coming
back three days ahead of schedule from
his overseas trip then what do you do in
that case do you say well what's the
ultimate source of that knowledge you
can say no well if you're skeptical
about what your friend said you say how
do you know that well I read it in the
times Ah that's it fine problem done now
you know you have a piece of knowledge
that the prime minister is coming home
three days ahead of schedule and you
know that the other person also knows
that and why you're not because your
friend has told you that it was reported
in the times you have a piece of
knowledge does it mean that this piece
of knowledge is
certainly true no it does not mean that
but this is the mistake the empiricists
make they want to turn knowledge into a
quest for certain truth which is wrong
what you want is that piece of
information that solves your problem it
could always be wrong it can be you are
fallible all sources are fallible that
is what popper is saying here that the
empiricists are not after checking
sources they're trying to find the
ultimate source as popper has asked what
is the next step he goes on to say quote
there are at least two next steps one
would be to reflect that I have read it
in the times is also an assertion and
that we might ask what is the source of
your knowledge that you read it in the
times and not say in a paper looking
very similar to the times the other is
to ask the times for the sources of its
knowledge the answer to the first
question may be but we have only the
times on order and we always get it in
the morning which gives rise to a host
of further questions about sources which
we will not pursue the second question I
elicit from the editor of the times the
answer well we had a telephone call from
the prime minister's office now
according to the empiricist procedure we
should at this next stage ask who is the
gentleman who received the telephone
call and then get his observation report
but we should also have to ask the
gentleman what is the source of your
knowledge that the voice you heard came
from an official in the prime minister's
office and someone end quote so my
reflection on this you can see here that
the empiricist era is a skeptical one
it's almost the denial of the
possibility of knowledge you just keep
asking but how do you know that give it
an answer you ask but how do you know
that and give it an answer you ask but
how do you know that and eventually you
get to this base observation now why the
empiricist is satisfied with someone
saying I just saw it or I just heard it
myself firsthand and not thinking that
well that could be an error is the topic
of this the whole idea being that senses
can lead you in error but of course the
empiricists the empiricists at this
point thought that the senses did not
lie there was no problem it was that you
could have direct perception and your
senses did not deceive you unless your
mind was corrupted by the evil demons or
bad ideas in some way shape or form Papa
goes on to say quote there is a simple
reason why this tedious sequence of
questions never comes to a satisfactory
conclusion it is this every witness must
always make ample use in his report of
his knowledge of persons places things
linguistic usages social conventions and
so on he cannot rely merely upon his
eyes or ears especially if his report is
to be of use in justifying any assertion
worth justifying but this fact must of
course always raise new questions as to
the sources of those elements of his
knowledge which are not immediately
observational end quote what papa is
saying there is theory-ladenness we've
got knowledge we've got other background
knowledge here knowledge of persons
places things linguistic users social
conventions and so on which when you're
given a report of something like the
prime minister is coming home from his
trip three days early you already have
all of that knowledge and that so that
knowledge itself is not cashed out by a
particular observation but allows you to
understand the message that you're being
given allows you to understand the
knowledge as being knowledge and without
it without understanding language
without understanding uh particular
people in particular places having this
concept that some people are reliable
interlocutors you can't make a judgment
about whether or not this assertion that
you've heard from someone is in fact
itself reliable there are reasons to be
more or less critical in certain places
this background knowledge comes together
as a kind of theory about what you think
about the assertion the theory ladeness
of the the assertion that you're being
given and the theory ladeness therefore
of any observation that another person
has made as well as Papa goes on to say
quote this is why the program of tracing
back all knowledge to its ultimate
source in observation is logically
impossible to carry through it leads to
an infinite regress the doctrine that
the truth is Manifest cuts off the
regress this is interesting because it
may help to explain the attractiveness
of that Doctrine I wish to mention in
parentheses that this argument is
closely related to another that all
observation involves interpretation in
the light of our theoretical knowledge
or that pure observational knowledge
unadulterated by Theory would if at all
possible be utterly Barren and futile
the most striking thing about the
observationalist program of asking for
sources apart from its tediousness is
its Stark violation of Common Sense
for if we are doubtful about an
assertion then the normal procedure is
to test it rather than to ask for its
sources and if we find independent
corroboration then we shall often accept
the assertion without bothering at all
about sources end quote perfect perfect
and this is why many of us have said
that Popper's conception of knowledge is
so much closer to the common sense
understanding of knowledge than the
academic more erudite versions of
knowledge that are so rarified as to be
completely disconnected from what people
actually mean by saying they know
something or have a piece of knowledge
when you are told something and you're
skeptical about it you go and check it
and once you've checked it and it is
corroborated by some other source then
you tend to say I know it now not in all
cases okay there are such things as in
the Modern Age we talk about
misinformation disinformation but this
is the whole point of having knowledge
in the first place of having good
background knowledge of trying to figure
out how it is that you can come to a
better understand standing of certain
sources which comes down to having an
explanation yourself of whether or not
what they're giving you is a good
explanation of whether or not they're
giving you a good explanation comes down
to what is the method and methodology
being used that they've used in order to
come to that conclusion if it is a
newspaper reporting on the movements of
the Prime Minister and you figure out
that the methodology is that the
reporter has contacted someone in the
prime minister's office good method
there's no reason to presume that people
are being lied to here now could it be
the case that someone's being lied to of
course it could be but until such time
as you think that that is the better
explanation for what is being told
there's no reason to endorse it you may
as well take primer Facey what people in
the prime minister's office are saying
about what the prime minister is doing
or for example if on the other hand
someone is trying to tell you well I
think that aliens from the other side of
the Galaxy are actually the explanation
for the existence of the Egyptian
pyramids that's different what is their
methodology for having figured this out
if it is merely there interpretate their
personal interpretation of certain
hieroglyphics not good enough not good
enough when it stands and start contrast
to what all the genuine egyptologists
have been telling us about how these
pyramids these boring structures these
piles of stones were built by vast
numbers of people ruled over by a
pharaoh okay and the presumably took
decades to centuries to build in some
cases we ourselves need heuristics which
allow us to check the knowledge that
people are purporting to have and those
heuristics come down to what is the
methodology what is the method of error
correction that is being used by those
particular people we don't care about
the ultimate source of the knowledge
often the ultimate source of the
knowledge in a sense will be them
themselves they're making stuff up but
what is the methodology that they used
was that reliable is that going to
produce a good explanation or is that
going to produce utter fiction back to
Papa's lecture and he says quote of
course there are cases in which the
situation is different testing and
historical assertion always means going
back to sources but not as a rule to the
reports of eyewitnesses clearly no
historian will accept the evidence of
documents uncritically there are
problems of genuineness there are
problems of bias there are of course
also problems such as was the writer
present when these events happened but
this is not one of the characteristic
problems of the historian he may worry
about the reliability of a report but he
will rarely worry about whether or not
the writer of the document was an
eyewitness of the event in question even
assuming that this event was of the
nature of an observable event a letter
saying I changed my mind yesterday on
this question maybe most valuable
historical evidence even though changes
of Mind are unobservable and even though
we make injecture in view of other
evidence that the writer was lying end
quote it's and so this also reveals the
richness and depth of Papa's
epistemology that it can reach into all
areas of our understanding of the world
from art and Mathematics through to
history as well as science but
the empiricists and others are narrowly
very very narrowly at times focused on
their perverse view of science they
ignore everything else they ignore the
knowledge that is instantiated in all
other subject areas much less knowledge
and sensiating objects but never mind
that but when it comes to history there
is no way of being able to check the
ultimate source of being able to check
whether or not the person who is writing
the historical documents actually
witnessed the so-called event that they
witnessed so if this is impossible this
is an impossible State of Affairs does
that mean we cannot possibly have
knowledge of history no we have
knowledge of History not because we know
that the people writing whatever they
wrote actually saw what it is that they
purport to have seen perhaps they didn't
perhaps they're just collecting other
documents and we don't have access to
the documents that they were looking at
the more ancient documents we've long
since been lost you know the Library of
Alexandria was lost so we rely upon
documents that
purport 2 be relying upon documents that
have long since been lost much less the
people who wrote those documents who
might have been writing about other
people who said they saw a particular
thing now recently this whole question
of lost civilizations these these uh
apparent cities and city-states and so
on and so forth for which we have scant
archaeological evidence but sometimes in
the writings of certain philosophers
these descriptions appear now why
because the philosophers might have been
reading books long since lost and the
only record we have that these books
kind of existed is in the writings of
the philosophers you know Plato writing
stuff about Atlantis and that kind of
thing but there are there are other such
examples now what do we say about any of
that what we say is we just don't know
we don't know until we find better
sources but in the meantime where we do
have good explanations of phenomena
which connect in in history especially
to physical artifacts as well then we
have we can have a good explanation of
these things but the empiricists the
empiricist is it has a real problem on
their hands because they are only
concerned about the cases for knowledge
where you can terminate in an actual
observation and you know the observation
has taken place and the observation is
inerrant in some way
but if you don't even in principle have
access to the observation because all
you have to rely upon is a historic
document testifying that someone might
have testified to having made the
observation
big problem for the empiricists but not
for populian epistemology for having a
reasonable explanation of some phenomena
or events in the past Papa goes on to
say you know this whole it's this this
unusual focus on eyewitnesses of needing
eyewitnesses because you need to have
since data papa says quote as to
eyewitnesses they are important almost
exclusively in a court of law where they
can be cross-examined as most lawyers
know eyewitnesses often ER this has been
experimentally investigated with the
most striking results Witnesses most
anxious to describe an event as it
happened are liable to make scores of
mistakes especially if some exciting
things happen in a hurry and if an event
suggests some tempting interpretation
then this interpretation more often than
not is allowed to distort what has
actually been seen end quote brilliant
absolutely brilliant now this is one of
the areas where if I can just mention
the science popularize and Neil deGrasse
Tyson he comes Under Fire now and again
for making some
philosophically naive statements okay
that aside I find his description of
parts of the scientific process eloquent
and accurate for example his talk
whenever he you know when he talks about
UFOs I think that this is when he is
absolutely in his prime and you can see
he really enjoys talking about this
stuff and he's perfectly right as far as
I can tell if someone comes into the
science laboratory and says I saw a UFO
you have to believe me I saw it in the
sky the scientists the critical thinker
at that point will say
who cares you saw it this this I saw it
thing is merely a problem it's the
starting point it's not the solution
it's not an answer you don't therefore
conclude on the basis of someone having
seen something someone having claimed to
have observed something therefore they
really did David Deutsch makes this
point in one of the questions that I ask
him in my series of questions to David
Deutsch about this exact phenomena this
idea that making observations is hard
scientists devise intricate complex
experiments and trying to figure out
what they're actually observing is half
the problem to try and figure out what
it is that your data is telling you
about what you've observed and popper is
saying here eyewitnesses notoriously
unreliable what the judge needs to do in
deciding a case based upon often
competing eyewitness testimonies is to
figure out an explanation as to why
people have come up with the ideas that
they have the theories of their own
observation which can be mistaken yes
there are optical illusions yes there
are errors that people make yes there
are even well-known physical phenomena
like Parallax area you know you're the
angle from which you're viewing
something can drastically alter the
position that you think it's in these
are all problems for observation which
mean that eyewitness testimony is
is known to be unreliable it's known to
not be a way of cashing out our best
explanations what's the point of
observation well as popper has taught us
the point of observations carefully made
is to decide between theories already
guessed not to generate theories not to
generate truth Papa goes on to say quote
hume's view of historical knowledge was
different we believe he writes in the
Treatise that Caesar was killed in the
Senate house on the Ides of March
because this fact is established on the
unanimous testimony of historians who
agreed to assign this precise time and
place to that event
here are certain characters and letters
present either to our memory or senses
which characters we likewise remember to
have been used as the signs of certain
ideas and these ideas were either in the
minds of such as were immediately
present at that action and received the
ideas directly from its existence or
they were derived from the testimony of
others and that again from another
testimony till we arrive at those who
were eyewitnesses and Spectators of the
event end quote from Hume and proper
explains quote it seems to me that this
view must lead to the infinite regress
described above for the problem is of
course whether the unanimous testimony
of historians is to be accepted or
whether it is perhaps to be rejected as
the result of their Alliance on a common
yet spurious Source the appeal to
letters present to our memory or our
senses cannot have any bearing on this
or on any other relevant problem of
historiography end quote and that's the
end of part 13 so we've had a discussion
there of history and of the purpose of
eyewitnesses and whether or not
observation observation itself can be
the Terminus for understanding whether
or not something counts as knowledge or
not and it can't be it plainly can't be
because we can't always be there to
figure out whether or not something is
truly seen and even if we are there to
say this is what we're seeing as he has
explained perfectly well there
eyewitnesses are notoriously unreliable
they can contradict one another to begin
with and our senses are just unreliable
despite what the impurities say despite
what the positivists want to say so here
we are at part 14 and proper begins in a
powerful Way by asking us quote
but what then are the sources of our
knowledge the answer I think is this
there are all kinds of sources of our
knowledge but none has Authority we may
say that the times can be a source of
knowledge or the Encyclopedia Britannica
we may say that certain papers in the
physical review about a problem in
physics have more Authority and are more
of the character of a source than an
article about the same problem in the
times or the encyclopedia but it would
be quite wrong to say that the source of
the article in the physical review must
have been holy or even partly
observation The Source May well be the
discovery of an inconsistency in another
paper or say the discovery of the fact
that a hypothesis proposed in another
paper could be tested by such and such
an experiment all these
non-observational discoveries are
sources in the sense that they add to
our knowledge I do not of course deny
that an experiment may also add to our
knowledge and in a most important manner
but it is not a source in any ultimate
sense it always has to be checked as in
the example of the news in the times we
didn't not as a rule question the
eyewitness of an experiment but if we
doubt the result we may repeat the
experiment or ask somebody else to
repeat it end quote perfect okay there's
Common Sense stuff right but the
empiricist needs to be reminded of this
apparently you know
it's not that someone performs an
experiment and observes it themselves
that cashes out that therefore the
experiment is absolutely true it's that
the experiment can possibly be tested by
anyone else to check to see whether or
not the results being claimed are in
fact true this is what happens in
science all the time it's the reason for
the existence of journals amongst other
things so that somebody can read what
you've done and then check to see what
you've done and of course at its best we
actually find out often about errors
people making honest experimental errors
are in the case of like cold fusion
making dishonest experimental errors
okay in that case they weren't even
published in a journal so far as I know
this is the the pons and Fleischmann
debacle or Scandal as it sometimes is
called the idea that they were able to
observe Fusion at a at room temperature
going on
false but I like that it was published
in the media before it got published in
a journal somewhere and then when you
know the questions began to mount of
course it turned out that they'd made an
error or at least at the very least they
made an error possibly they'd lied the
point is in science it needs to be
repeatable the whole idea that science
is about regularities in nature are
one-off a one-off thing can't be part of
science that's not to say that the
one-off thing never happened or never
did happen but by definition we can't go
about repeating it and we won't have a
good explanation of that thing it's just
going to remain a mystery and according
to you know our best Theory of physics
you will get these one-off rare weird
coincidences that don't represent
regularities in nature they can be put
down to insofar as they are an honest
thing that people have actually seen
this weird transgression of what is
otherwise the regularities in nature
these one-off events okay which also
includes things like the first bit of
knowledge that is produced in any case
you know lots of lots of one-off things
happen routinely all the time but you
know I'm talking about the genuine
one-off thing where someone reports
having seen the the thing flying through
the sky you know the proverbial you know
pigs flying across the sky wasn't all
part of science even if even if it was a
genuine observation
well because it's consistent with what
we know the laws of physics to be but
it's not a regularity of nature these
things could possibly happen an
extremely unlikely coincidence more than
likely the best explanation in those
situations is someone has hallucinated
now must that be the explanation no it
mustn't be it doesn't have to be in all
likelihood it is because this is a
better explanation that something has
happened inside of your own brain to
cause you to hallucinate to see The
Flying Pig but the Flying Pig might have
a reason as due to Quantum laws of
physics okay highly unlikely in science
we need to be able to check we need to
check whether or not this is a genuine
regularity in nature one-off events are
not like that Papa goes on to say quote
the fundamental mistake made by the
philosophical theory of the ultimate
sources of our knowledge is that it does
not distinguish clearly enough between
questions of origin and questions of
validity
admittedly in the case of historiography
these two questions May sometimes
coincide the question of the validity of
an historical assertion may be testable
only or mainly in the light of the
origin of certain sources but in general
the two questions are different and in
general we do not test the validity of
an assertion or information by tracing
its sources or its origin but we test it
much more directly by a Critical
examination of what has been asserted of
the asserted facts themselves end quote
and I'm just ending the quoting there
just so I can preface the next little
passage with pay attention here this is
a powerful distillation of Papa's
position on empiricism given what he has
just said about the whole point of
knowing something comes down to whether
or not we can test its validity in some
way shape or form we need to be able to
test it not find the final observation
he says in concluding this part quote
thus the empiricists questions how do
you know what is the source of your
assertion are wrongly put
they are not formulated in an inexact or
slowly manner but they are entirely
misconceived they are questions that beg
for an authoritarian answer end quote
brilliant the how do you know question
as the empiricist asks it is asking for
the ultimate source of your knowledge
the authoritative starting point namely
the idea that someone saw it that
someone heard it that they were present
as an eyewitness to be able to cash out
a validity of that thing all the while
assuming all the while assuming that the
census can't possibly ER but we've
already seen that the sense absolutely
Canada in many ways people are fallible
and it's because people are fallible
that the empiricists cannot possibly be
correct people can make mistakes always
you can always be laboring under some
misconception and thereby we arrive at
part 15 and papa goes on to say quote
the traditional systems of epistemology
may be said to result from yes answers
or no answers to questions about the
sources of knowledge they never
challenge these questions or dispute
their legitimacy the questions are taken
as Perfectly Natural and nobody seems to
see any harm in them this is quite
interesting for these questions are
clearly authoritarian in spirit they can
be compared with that traditional
question of political Theory who should
rule which begs for an authoritarian
answer such as the best or the wisest or
the people or the majority it suggests
incidentally that silly Alternatives
such as whom do you want as rulers the
capitalists or the workers analogous to
what is the ultimate source of knowledge
the intellect or the senses this
political question is wrongly put and
the answers which it elicits are
paradoxical as I have tried to show in
chapter 7 of my open Society it should
be replaced by a completely different
question such as how can we organize our
political institutions so that bad or
incompetent rulers whom we should not
try to get but whom we so easily might
get all the same cannot do much damage
end quote now this is a subtly different
formulation to the way I normally put
Popper's Criterion of democracy the
normal way of putting this the regular
way I should say the more common way
that you see it in print is how can we
most easily remove bad rulers and bad
policies without Force without violence
that's the way it's put the way popper
is phrasing it here is how can we
organize our political institutions so
that bad or incompetent rulers cannot do
much damage or cannot do too much damage
that's a great way of putting I love
that very anti-authoritarian there it's
very much in the mold here of
Churchill's injunction that well
democracy is the worst of all forms of
governance except for all those other
forms that we've tried here popper is
saying look you know we we need a
democracy we've got a democracy it's the
only way we can organize Society right
now given that people are going to be
unreasonable at times so we're going to
have to have rulers to sort of Corral
Society in some way but the fundamental
question before us is how can we how can
we ensure that they don't do too much
damage
which is great that's perfect because as
he says
you're going to get the bad and
incompetent rulers all the same he says
you might get them all the same more
often than not you're going to get bad
and incompetent rulers more often than
not now it's either have the bad and
incompetent rule or no ruler at all all
right so that seems to be the choice for
us it's it's impossible to have the best
rule out it's impossible even to have I
would say the good ruler simply by
virtue of the fact that anyone who is
seeking that office is probably not the
person you want okay I say probably but
the characteristics of a person who uh
that kind of individual who says yes I'm
going to tell others what to do more
often than not has the wrong philosophy
has the wrong philosophy they endorse a
kind of coercion they think I know best
for others so automatically at the first
hurdle you know people like me rule them
out so to speak as of being of good
characters of being the best best card
now there are some people in politics
who you would want to have more power
because you can tell when you listen to
them that they're not going to exercise
it in some bad way but eventually you
know power corrupts and all that sort of
stuff so the whole point of democracy is
how can we get rid of these people once
they begin to reveal themselves as not
being in it for the right reasons but
instead in it for themselves or in for
social control or in it for trying to
impose their will upon others to be
coercive in some way what do we do we
need to be able to get rid of them so
before they do too much damage
having a voting system having a system
where we can vote them out without
violence and so papa says you know
popper is saying there that the question
is not who should rule the question is
how do you organize your political
institutions and he goes on to say I
believe that only by changing our
question in this way
can we hope to proceed towards a
reasonable theory of political
institutions the question about the
sources of our knowledge can be replaced
in a similar way it has always been
asked in the spirit of what are the best
sources of our knowledge the most
reliable ones those which will not lead
us into error and those which we can and
must turn in case of Doubt as the last
court of appeal
I propose to assume instead that no such
ideal sources exist no more than ideal
rulers and that all sources are liable
to lead us into error at times and I
propose to replace therefore the
question of the sources of our knowledge
by the entirely different question
how can we hope to detect and eliminate
error end quote
there you go that that's the genius in
full flight there The Genius of Papa
coming down on the side of we're not
going to find the ultimate authoritative
source what we can hope for is to detect
and eliminate error a wonderfully
digital computational modern view of
epistemology okay the this ability to
error correct is what we're after and if
you have an ultimate source of knowledge
if the truth is Manifest then you don't
have any hope of correcting the error
because you don't believe that there is
an area in that thing that you've
observed because it's the absolute truth
there's no hope of making progress
beyond that thing this is the optimistic
philosophy optimistic in David Deutsche
sense okay problems are soluble and
Evils are just due to a lack of
knowledge we can correct those evils we
can correct the mistakes and the errors
Papa goes on to say quote the question
of the sources of our knowledge like so
many authoritarian questions is a
genetic one it asks for the origin of
our knowledge in the belief that
knowledge May legitimize Itself by its
pedigree end quote that that's brilliant
just there my reflection on this this is
saying what is your source is simply
pushing the Quest for explanation back a
step without really answering the
substantive Claim about whether or not
something is an explanation or a valid
piece of knowledge and so on it's simply
saying my source is X and then we
quibble not about the substance of what
is said but rather about whether X is
going to be a reliable Authority on the
matter or not which is an entirely
different and pointless question the
so-called pedigree with the knowledge
we're going back to like holy texts and
so on and so forth that's a Strong
pedigree a purebred Breeze of knowledge
so to speak we can trace it all the way
back to the the Old Testament or
something like that or we can trace it
back to I got it from my senses I saw
the thing Papa continues with this
metaphor he says
[Laughter]
quote the nobility of the racially pure
knowledge the untainted knowledge the
knowledge which derives from the highest
Authority if possible from God these are
the often unconscious metaphysical ideas
behind the question my modified question
how can we hope to detect error may be
said to derive from The View that such
pure untainted and certain sources do
not exist and that questions of origin
or Purity should not be confounded with
questions of validity or of Truth end
quote wonderful today these modern
versions of empiricist induction type
knowledge bayesianism in other words and
modern views of rationality not Papa's
view other views of rationality they're
all about the Quest for final truth or
at least probable truth they're not
about correcting error it's not about
detecting error it's about trying to
find the source which can increase your
Credence for example in the truth of
certain statements they're not
interested so much
when you take Syria that they are okay
but the people are off people are always
interested in good explanations that's
what they really want the bayesians are
actually a person who self-identifies as
a Bayesian isn't primarily interested in
predictions as a matter of their
personal life even if they're a
scientist or something else like that
except in the rarified case of
theoretical physics okay that's an
exception to the rule but in all other
cases people are genuinely after
explanations they just don't realize
that popper is already captured and
David Deutsch has captured what it means
to generate a good explanation it's not
merely about prediction but the
bayesians are confused on this point
they think there is this as papa says
there some kind of nobility of the
racially pure knowledge the untainted
knowledge the knowledge which derives
from the highest Authority they might
not say God but I'll say from the
evidence or from the science something
like that okay that has a Strong
pedigree in terms of observational data
that's what they want they want to be
able to say well my my knowledge is
absolutely valid or my knowledge has a
very high Credence 98 confidence in this
particular piece of knowledge why
because we have multiple lines of
evidence coming together and we've
gathered all of this evidence so we have
very high confidence that this thing is
true or probably true in some way
we're not talking about the elimination
of error we're talking about the
accumulation of supposed truth and then
measuring the truth in some way shape or
form quantifying it it's the wrong it's
coming at it from the wrong angle better
we say we have an explanation we don't
think it's the final explanation it is
an explanation that corrects errors in
previous explanations but it itself will
contain some errors which we might not
know what they are yet but we expect
them to arise eventually and when they
do that will be a problem we'll correct
those errors then by solving the problem
coming up with a yet better explanation
it's all about detecting errors and
correcting them this very view this very
view of correcting errors of not
confusing this with questions of
validity or truth popper goes on to say
quote this view may be said to be as old
as xenophonies xenophanes knew that our
knowledge is guesswork opinion doctor
rather than episteme as shown by his
verses and now we go on to Quick poppers
going under quote xenophonies it's a
long tradition of this now uh David
Deutsch has quoted xenophanese in the
beginning of infinity same passage and I
will quote it here again now the
wonderful quote is quote
the gods did not reveal from the
beginning all things to us but in the
course of time through seeking men find
that which is the better but as for
certain truth no man has known it nor
will he know it neither of the Gods nor
yet of all the things of which I speak
and even if by chance he were to utter
the final truth he would himself not
know it for all is but a woven web of
gases end quote from xenophonies Papa
goes on to say quote yet the traditional
question of the authoritative sources of
knowledge is repeated even today and
very often by the positivists and by
other philosophers who believe
themselves to be in revolt against
Authority the proper answer to my
question how can we hope to detect and
eliminate error is I Believe by
criticizing the theories or guesses of
others and if we can train ourselves to
do so by criticizing our own theories or
guesses the latter point is highly
desirable but not indispensable for if
we fail to criticize our own theories
there may be others to do it for us
this answer sums up a position which I
propose to call critical rationalism it
is a view and attitude and a tradition
which we owe to the Greeks it is very
different from the rationalism or
intellectualism of Descartes in his
school and very different even from the
epistemology of Kant yet in the field of
ethics of moral knowledge it was
approached by Kant with his principle of
autonomy this principle expresses his
realization that we must not accept the
command of an authority however exalted
as the basis of ethics for whenever we
are faced with a command by an authority
it is for us to judge critically whether
it is moral or immoral to obey the
authority may have power to enforce its
commands and we may be powerless to
resist but if we have the physical Power
of Choice then the ultimate
responsibility remains with us it is our
own critical decision whether to obey a
command whether to submit to an
authority can't boldly carry decide deer
into the field of religion quote in
whatever way he writes the deity should
be made known to you and even if he
should reveal himself to you it is you
who must judge whether you are permitted
to believe in him and to worship Him end
quote from can't in view of this bold
statement it seems strange the cart did
not adopt the same attitude that of
Critical examination of the critical
search for error in the field of science
I feel certain that it was only his
acceptance of the authority of Newton's
cosmology a result of its almost
unbelievable success in passing the most
severe tests which prevented can't from
doing so end quote that that's marvelous
so in other words popper is giving can't
cry quite an amount of credit here and
saying well basically he got critical
rationalism except for the fact that
Newton's theories of physics were so
wonderfully successful so perfectly
precise the time the guy at the time of
cards they that they were able to
predict everything within their domain
to perfect accuracy no one could find a
flaw with them and because of that
inherent ability that that no one could
find a problem with them he thought as
almost everyone did at the time well
this is the final Theory of physics we
have the truth about physical laws
because no one can find an error so if
only he had known that it wasn't the
final Theory of physics there could be
no final Theory of physics then can't
have might have been able to go the
whole way and apply this
anti-authoritarian critical idea even to
science but he he lacked the imagination
apparently to do so some lack the
imagination even today Papa goes on to
say quote if this interpretation of Kant
is correct then the critical rationalism
and also the critical empiricism which I
advocate merely puts the finishing touch
to kant's own critical philosophy and
this was made possible by Einstein who
taught us that Newton's Theory May well
be mistaken in spite of its overwhelming
success end quote and of course the
lesson there is even Einstein's theory
we should expect to be flawed in ways
analogous to the ways in which Newton's
theory was found to be flawed eventually
in the final analysis one day when we
begin to find more and more problems
with relativity or with aspects of
interior and so on we should expect
these theories to be overturned subsumed
into some deeper Theory which which
explains what they got right and why and
the ways in which they're wrong and how
to correct the errors that they made
let's go on Papa continues to say quote
So my answer to the questions how do you
know what is the source or the basis of
your assertion What observations have
led you to it would be I do not know my
assertion was merely a guess
never mind the source or the sources
from which it may spring there are many
possible sources and I may not be aware
of half of them and origins or pedigrees
having any case little bearing upon
truth but if you are interested in the
problem which I tried to solve by my
tentative assertion you may help me by
criticizing it as severely as you can
and if you can design some experimental
tests which you think might refute my
assertion I shall gladly enter the best
of my Powers help you refute it end
quote yes and so that is the ideal
stance for a scientist to have or a
historian so on and so forth that they
would say you know here is my idea here
is my hypothesis here is my assertion
here is my explanation purported Theory
and so on and so forth criticize it for
me help me to shoot it down and if
you've got some way of doing an
experiment let's hear it and let's try
and find floor with this particular idea
let's find a new problem perhaps so we
can make even more progress Papa goes on
to say quote this answer applies
strictly speaking only if the question
is asked about some scientific assertion
as distinct from an historical one if my
conjecture was an historical one sources
in the non-ultimate sense will of course
come into the critical discussion of its
validity yet fundamentally my answer
will be the same as we have seen and
that ends part 15. we're now on to part
16 and here in this part 16 we're going
to get a potted summary from popper
himself about his epistemology as
explained so far throughout this
particular piece papa says in part 16
quote it is high time now I think to
formulate the epistemological results of
this discussion I'll put them in the
form of nine Theses end quote now at
this point I'm just noticing that uh in
my version of this I don't know if this
is every version but certainly the
Kindle version
um the problem I have is that the
numbering system for these nine Theses
is a bit out of whack but I'll do my
best in trying to number these one
through to nine I'll see how we go the
first thesis that popper has here
written is quote number one there are no
ultimate sources of knowledge every
Source every suggestion is welcome and
every Source every suggestion is open to
Critical examination except in history
we usually examine the facts themselves
rather than the sources of our
information thesis two
the proper epistemological question is
not one about sources rather we ask
whether the assertion made is true that
is to say whether it agrees with the
facts that we may operate without
getting involved in antimonies with the
idea of objective truth in the sense of
Correspondence to the facts has been
shown by the work of alfredaski and we
try to find this out as well as we can
by examining or testing the assertion
itself either in a direct way or by
examining or testing its consequences
thesis three in connection with this
examination all kinds of arguments may
be relevant a typical procedure is to
examine whether our theories are
consistent with our observations but we
may also examine for example whether our
historical sources are mutually and
internally consistent thesis 4.
quantitatively and qualitatively by far
the most important source of our
knowledge apart from inborn knowledge is
tradition most things we know we have
learned by example by being told by
reading books by learning how to
criticize how to take and to accept
criticism how to respect truth the fact
that most of the traditional sources of
our knowledge are traditional condemns
anti-traditionalism as futile but this
fact must not be held to support a
traditionalist attitude every bit of our
traditional knowledge and even our
inborn knowledge is open to Critical
examination and may be overthrown
nevertheless without tradition knowledge
would be impossible end quote so that
thesis is brilliantly put and I think
needs to be
perhaps more often put more strenuously
by me I try to make this point very very
often this idea that we have inborn
knowledge and the idea that there is
knowledge in our Traditions I say it
often but it's as if as if people don't
hear that there's a lot of things that
people don't hear when you explain
pop-up okay for example you know when
you're explaining the the Criterion of
demarcation of course they hear what it
traditionally heard is if you can't test
it as a matter of practice now then it's
not falsifiable but it's not about that
it's about in principle can you test it
and that Papa didn't think that science
was just about experimentally testable
results it's about explanations of
physical phenomena that's what science
is really about you know conjectural
knowledge of physical reality people
don't hear that they hear falsification
what can you do and when I try and apply
some of these ideas to Modern
conceptions of things like AGI let's say
or the supposed gradations and
intelligence between people and we talk
about David Deutsch's modern conception
of the universal explainer as being the
genuine criteria for what a person is
and so therefore making
claims that people have differences in
inherent IQ the inherent ability to
understand things as being false that
somehow this means we endorse a version
of tabular rasa you know that the idea
that we have a blank slate we don't we
endorse Papa's idea that there are
inborn ideas that we have these ideas
that we're born with but but importantly
all ideas are a form of knowledge
knowledge is conjectural our ideas can
be changed even if you have an inborn
idea of some sort you can change your
mind it's a whole idea of this phrase
changing your mind and if you have
traditional knowledge it doesn't mean
that just because the traditional
knowledge is traditional that it needs
to be defended at all costs nor does it
mean it needs to be overturned simply by
the fact that it's the triggered
knowledge it means it is knowledge it's
our best explanation at the moment we
need to rely upon it to solve our
problems until someone comes along with
an objectively better idea people don't
hear that people don't hear these
particular things now I think we're up
to thesis five so thesis five sets quote
knowledge cannot start from nothing from
a tabula rasa nor yet from observation
the advance of knowledge consists mainly
in the modification of earlier knowledge
although we may sometimes for example in
archeology Advance through a chance
observation the significance of the
discovery will usually depend upon its
power to modify our earlier theories
thesis 6. pessimistic and optimistic
epistemologies are about equally
mistaken the pessimistic Cave Story of
Plato is the true one and not his
optimistic story of amanesis even though
we should admit that all men like all
animals and even all plants possess
inborn knowledge end quote if you're
interested in what this amanesis is this
is from episodes one and two of this
particular series on on the sources of
knowledge and of ignorance in short
amanesis is the fact that we all have
the knowledge of Ultimate Reality but
we've forgotten it and Plato's view is
that we're just trying to ReDiscover
that which were our Immortal Souls
actually already know our bodies are
this corrupted version of The Immortal
soul of the ultimate form that we have
and so coming to know things is a
process of coming to remember what it is
that we've forgotten incorrect but what
Plato had right from the cave is that we
don't have direct access to reality okay
it's layered with interpretation it's
like like we are looking at Shadows on a
cave wall you've got that much right
thinking that this therefore prevents us
from ever knowing anything of ever
having actual knowledge of reality is
false we come to knowledge of reality
but it's just that the knowledge isn't
absolutely certainly true it's not final
we can refine it over time and improve
it over time but it's still knowledge of
reality it's just not reality itself
perfect uh truth about reality so we're
continuing here with thesis six and papa
goes on to say quote but although the
world of appearances is indeed a world
of mere Shadows on the walls of our cave
we all constantly Reach Out Beyond it
and although as Democritus said the
truth is hidden in the Deep we can probe
into the deep there is no Criterion of
Truth at our disposal and this fact
supports pessimism but we do possess
criteria which if we are lucky may allow
us to recognize error and falsity
Clarity and distinctness are not
criteria of truth but such things as
obscurity or confusion May indicate
error similarly coherence cannot
establish truth but incoherence and
inconsistency do establish falsehood and
when they are recognized our own errors
provide the dim red lights which help us
in our groping our way out of the
darkness of our cave end quote and I
believe we're at thesis seven now
paparized neither observation nor reason
are authorities intellectual intuition
and Imagination are most important but
they are not reliable they may show us
things very clearly and yet they may
mislead us they are indispensable as the
main sources of our theories but most of
our theories are false anyway the most
important function of observation and
reasoning and even of intuition and
Imagination is to help us in the
Critical examination of those bold
conjectures which are the means by which
we probe into the unknown end quote
wonderful pop is epistemology includes
this it includes intuition intellectual
intuition and Imagination and he says
that they're most important but
simultaneously not reliable these are
ways in which we can concoct our
theories and ways in which we can find
errors in our theories they're
indispensable to the project or
production of the production of
knowledge it's just they're not reliable
we have to use our critical means in
order to figure out whether or not what
is being purported by our imagination
our intuition is actually correct in
some way or can we find errors within it
thesis 8 I believe
every solution of a problem raises new
unsolved problems the more so the deeper
the original problem and the Bolder its
solution the more we learn about the
world and the deeper our learning the
more conscious specific and articulate
will be our knowledge of what we do not
know our knowledge of our ignorance for
this indeed is the main source of our
ignorance
fact that our knowledge can be only
finite while our ignorance must
necessarily be infinite end quote
well then isn't that brilliant so there
you have that there's the answer
on the sources of our knowledge and our
ignorance what's the source about
ignorance
the fact that our knowledge can be only
finite while our ignorance must
necessarily be infinite it's the
finiteness of our knowledge so therefore
the source of our ignorance is
everything else beyond that which we
know that's our ignorance it's the the
universe the reality is the source of
our ignorance and I believe this is
thesis 9. and this Echoes things that
David Deutsche said about you know
should you feel small in contemplating
the universe you know and he Compares it
to cows should you feel small and
contemplating a cow no a cow is just a
stupid animal you're a human being you
can think papa says on this quote
we may get a glimpse of the vastness of
our ignorance when we contemplate the
vastness of the heavens though the mere
size of the universe is not the deepest
cause of our ignorance it is one of its
causes quote where I seem to differ from
some of my friends FP Ramsey wrote in a
Charming passage of his foundations of
mathematics isn't attaching little
importance to physical science I don't
feel in the least humble before the
vastness of the heavens the Stars may be
large but they cannot think or love and
these are qualities which impress me far
more than size does I take no credit for
weighing nearly 17 Stone end quote
probably goes on the same I suspect that
Ramsay's friends would have agreed with
him about the insignificance of sheer
physical size and I suspect if they felt
humble before the vastness of the
heavens this was because they saw in it
a symbol of their ignorance end quote
now I'm coming rapidly to the end of
part 16 here indeed we only have one
paragraph left before we get to the
conclusion the conclusion of the entire
lecture which is part 17 but here in
this final paragraph we get here Papa
quote one of his Almost Famous aphorisms
and so let me just read that in this
final paragraph of part 16. he says
quote
I believe that it would be worth trying
to learn something about the world even
if in trying to do so we should merely
learn that we do not know much this
state of learned ignorance might be a
help in many of our troubles it might be
well for all of us to remember that
while differing widely in the various
little bits we know in our infinite
ignorance we are all equal end quote
wonderful so this is an appeal for the
equality of all people the equality of
all men of all people of all humans
everywhere of all thinking beings that
while differing in the little bits and
pieces that we do know it's the infinite
ignorance of everything else that makes
us quite equal and so we are just
solving problems in different domains
yet another reason why I say continue to
make this point that there aren't
differences genuinely in IQ people have
different interests it would be a very
boring world if everyone wanted to be a
pure mathematician and a theoretical
physicist the two areas which are
usually associated with having high IQ
but we don't want that as people what we
want is people trying to solve problems
in every single domain every domain
artistic political introspection physics
chemistry making films making new
programs new versions of chat GPT people
have different interests in different
areas now if you are absolutely
fascinated by trying to create ever
better sculptures of pigeons no one's
ever going to say you're a genius you've
got the highest IQ in the world they
won't be interested in trying to test
you to see how hierarchy was and yet it
might be really high then you've never
had your IQ tested but because of your
particular interest you're counted out
as being one of the smart people because
of your interest your interest is in
Pottery or sculpting or some artistic
Endeavor and this is unfortunate but
this is the way that psychology has
taught us to be and yet everyone's
ignorant everyone's infinitely ignorant
about everything everything all we
differ in are the little bits and pieces
that we do know so let us turn now to
the conclusion part 17 of on the sources
of knowledge and of our ignorance and
papa rights quote
there is a last question I wish to raise
if only we look for it we can often find
a true idea worthy of being preserved in
a philosophical Theory which must be
rejected as false can we find an idea
like this one in one of the theories of
the ultimate sources of our knowledge I
believe we can and I suggest that it is
one of the two main ideas which underlie
the doctrine that the source of all our
knowledge is Supernatural
the first of these ideas is false I
believe or the second is true the first
the false idea is that we must justify
our knowledge or our theories by
positive reasons that is by reasons
capable of establishing them or at least
of making them highly probable at any
rate by better reasons than that they
have so far withstood criticism this
idea implies as I suggested that we must
appeal to some ultimate or authoritative
source of true knowledge which still
leaves open the character of that
Authority whether it is human like
observation or reason or superhuman and
therefore Supernatural the second idea
whose vital importance has been stressed
by Russell is that no man's Authority
can establish Truth by decree that we
should submit to truth that truth is
above human authority taken together
these two ideas almost immediately yield
the conclusion that the sources from
which our knowledge derives must be
superhuman a conclusion which tends to
encourage self-righteousness and the use
of force against those who refuse to see
the Divine truth
some who rejected this conclusion to not
unhappily reject the first idea the
belief in the existence of ultimate
sources of knowledge instead they reject
a second idea the thesis that truth is
above human authority they thereby
endanger the idea of the objectivity of
knowledge and of common standards of
criticism or rationality end quote
wonderful so this is the idea that truth
is out there in reality it's there in
the world it's there to be discovered
but we can't quite get there but we know
that it exists and it is objective
there's a truth of the matter about any
particular thing and it is beyond humans
it is beyond our ability to see with our
eyes Here Without Ears use our reason to
actually get to what we have are
explanations of the truth but that the
truth exists is an objective fact about
reality and once you bring this
superhuman phenomena quality of reality
namely that there is a truth there is a
truth and we can come to know it know it
in the papyrian sense know it fallibly
know it through our explanations once
you take that away from reality and put
it within the minds of people then as
papa says it tends to encourage
self-righteousness and the use of force
against those who refuse to see the
Divine truth now it doesn't mean that
these people necessarily believe in
Divine truth in the sense of God in some
way in fact there are certain
philosophies take objectivism
objectivism is one such that endorses
the idea that truth can be understood by
human beings
but it takes and it that simultaneously
says that there is no Supernatural way
of validating this stuff that the God
does not exist and so forth but people
can get hold of the truth and so once
they have hold of the truth then yeah
they become self-righteous they become
willing to label others okay as of uh of
not of not the right quality so to speak
uh of being bad people versus good
people and so on and so forth because
they have possession of the truth where
does the truth come from from their
senses because they endorse a version of
empiricism
but as papa says truth is above human
authority no person can say they're in
possession of the truth because a person
is fallible a person is fallible and is
always fallible so let me just recap and
go on okay so what I just read was quote
taken together these two ideas almost
immediately yield the conclusion that
the sources from which our knowledge
derives must be superhuman a conclusion
which tends to encourage
self-righteousness and the use of force
against those who refuse to see the
Divine truth some who rightly reject
this conclusion to not unhappily reject
the first idea the belief in the
existence of ultimate sources of
knowledge instead they reject a second
idea the thesis that truth is above
human authority they thereby endanger
the idea of the objectivity of knowledge
and of common standards of criticism or
rationality because they're saying that
certain people subjectively can be in
possession of the truth they have it
because they know they have it okay it
becomes part of subjective knowledge you
think you've got the certain truth and
so therefore you're willing to go out
there and be self-righteous
that this takes truth away from and it
takes knowledge away from being
objective out there in the world able to
be tested and criticized because if
you've got the final truth how could you
possibly criticize the final truth it is
the final truth there's nothing wrong
with it there's no point criticizing it
so Papa goes on to say quote what we
should do I suggest is to give up the
idea of ultimate sources of knowledge
and admit that all knowledge is human
that is mixed with our errors our
prejudices our dreams and our hopes and
that all we can do is grope for truth
even though it is beyond our reach we
may admit that our groping is often
inspired but we must be on our guard
against the belief however deeply felt
that our inspiration carries any
Authority Divine or otherwise if we thus
admit that there is no Authority beyond
the reach of criticism to be found
within the whole province of our
knowledge however far it may have
penetrated into the unknown then we can
retain without any danger the idea that
truth is beyond human authority and we
must retain it for without this idea
there can be no objective standards of
inquiry no criticism of our conjectures
no groping for the unknown no Quests for
knowledge end quote end of the piece end
of the lecture here and isn't that a
wonderful way to end things this
orbiting of the idea that the doctrine
of the truth is Manifest as a source of
all tyranny we have to admit the truth
exists it's out there it's something we
can come to know know in the papyrian
sense have explanations of the truth and
be able to say this thing is false we
have found an error in this thing okay
in this claim about reality we've found
that it is not the truth no one can
possess the truth no person because once
they do they become the Authority or
once you say that your senses are able
to give you the truth and they become
the authority replacing the Bible or the
priest or the king or whoever the
authority is with your senses isn't an
improvement really well okay so it is
replacing the traditional authorities of
the Bible the priest the king whoever
with your senses is an incremental
Improvement it says that well you can
come to know things yourself but taken
seriously it's just replacing one
Authority with another we can do away
with all authorities popular saying
because anyone who claims to possess the
authority then tends to become
self-righteous then tends to become the
kind of person willing to deploy Force
against others who are not in possession
of the truth so saying that your senses
give you truth is a problem so we have
to get away from that the senses give
you information the information might be
incorrect it might be misconceived but
it could lead you towards knowledge
knowledge that is not final knowledge
that is conjectural knowledge that is
good explanation that allows you to make
progress so this ends my series on on
the sources of knowledge and of
ignorance by Carl popper one for before
I imagine the die-hard epistemologists
out there and I hope you'll agree that
this was a tour de force of poppers
epistemology indeed his entire
philosophy to some extent summarized
here in these in this particular podcast
anyway in these last few sections of his
lecture and I think we can see here in
this particular lecture that pop art
writes as clearly as any other
philosopher when it comes to this kind
of thing for the time in answering his
critics and answering his other
contemporaries as well we've gone from
the history of these ideas through to
today and I think we can see it's still
applicable now that the same mistakes
are being made people thinking that they
have access to the truth that we that
following the evidence that the science
has some kind of authority all of these
authorities in some way shape or form
warp what knowledge production is really
about it's really about making
incremental progress detecting and
correcting our errors as time goes on
until next time on topcast bye
[Music]
oh